1	1 INTRODUCTION

2	Traditional companies and institutions are making use of e-commerce to overcome the boundaries of space and time: it allows them to globalize their operations and offer a more personalized service to the customer. 

3	Moreover, many entrepreneurs took advantage of the benefits of e-commerce and created new business models.

4	E-commerce has greatly evolved for forty years of existence and is still evolving continuously, as well as the software offered to support it. 

5	When searching for e-commerce solutions, almost all offered systems are focused on building web-shops, despite of the fact that electronic commerce is not just about web shopping any longer.

6	1.1 MOTIVATION

1	Traditional companies and institutions are making use of e-commerce to overcome the boundaries of space and time: it allows them to globalize their operations and offer a more personalized service to the customer. 

2	Moreover, many entrepreneurs took advantage of the benefits of e-commerce and created new business models.

3	E-commerce has greatly evolved for forty years of existence and is still evolving continuously, as well as the software offered to support it. 

4	When searching for e-commerce solutions, almost all offered systems are focused on building web-shops, despite of the fact that electronic commerce is not just about web shopping any longer.

1 INTRODUCTIONTraditional companies and institutions are making use of e-commerce to overcome the boundaries of space and time: it allows them to globalize their operations and offer a more personalized service to the customer. Moreover, many entrepreneurs took advantage of the benefits of e-commerce and created new business models.E-commerce has greatly evolved for forty years of existence and is still evolving continuously, as well as the software offered to support it. When searching for e-commerce solutions, almost all offered systems are focused on building web-shops, despite of the fact that electronic commerce is not just about web shopping any longer.1.1 MOTIVATIONAs it will be demonstrated in the section Current Alternatives 1.3.4, it is safe to say that customizable software solutions are too rigid to give an efficient and profitable answer to a future e-commerce context. So instead of offering a final product pre-built on top of an ecommerce platform and customize it to fit the merchants needs, why not provide a robust and flexible e-commerce platform to let merchants build what they need from the beginning? It was that particular question that led the team of SPHERE.IO to design and develop this new commerce platform-as-a-service. Their main goal was creating an e-commerce platform with a set of tools to allow developers to easily access and process all commerce data from within any kind of application.The SPHERE.IO backend system, where all commerce data is stored, is directly accessible via a RESTful web API, allowing any external system to use the data, regardless of the programming language or chosen framework. In order to provide a more comfortable development experience, they built the first of many open-source client libraries to come: a Java client library. On top of it they created the SPHERE.IO Play SDK, a toolkit especially aimed for building web applications with ease using the Play web framework (Figure 1.1). Since no system has ever been developed with this platform before, except for some small testing sites, it is required to implement a realistic e-commerce application on top of it in order to test its benefits and correct its flaws. It is also necessary to have a bootstrap project from which other future internal or external projects may reuse its code. 1.2 OBJECTIVESThe project has two main objectives that are strongly connected. One objective is to analyze, design and develop the first web-shop using the SPHERE.IO platform. This implementation will provide a first open source template, which then can be reused by developers to build their own web-shops. Additionally the source code will serve as a live documentation about how to use the platform. The second objective is to evaluate the capability of SPHERE.IO to compete with current ecommerce solutions. Better alternatives will be proposed to the platform development team when needed, aiming to improve its initial design. This evaluation can be achieved by the development of the previously mentioned web-shop, which will assist as a practical example to test the suitability of the platform to build these kind of popular applications.1.3 BACKGROUNDBefore attempting to evaluate any e-commerce solution it is necessary to exactly define what is understood as electronic commerce (section What is e-commerce 1.3.1). It is also important to take a look at history in order to comprehend what elements made e-commerce become what it is today (section History of e-commerce 1.3.2). With that knowledge in hand, we will get a glimpse of the future and decide whether the current e-commerce solutions have a place in it (section Future of e-commerce 1.3.3). 1.3.1 WHAT ISE-COMMERCEAs a general definition, commerce is the branch of business that includes all activities, which directly or indirectly are involved in exchanging goods or services. The trade can be held between businesses or individuals, eventually achieving the goal of transferring goods from producers to consumers. When information and communication technologies are applied to support these activities, we are referring to electronic commerce, also commonly known as ecommerce [Akr11]. Currently there are four major types of e-commerce, classified based on the roles involved in the trade: business-to-business (B2B), business-to-consumer (B2C), consumer-to-business (C2B) and consumer-to-consumer (C2C). Other lesser types may involve roles such as government, employee or manager in order to define more specialized e-commerce business models. Though any of those types can be considered to be subtypes of the four major models [Nem11]. Business-to-business comprehends those commerce transactions held between businesses. In e-commerce the volume of B2B sales is around twice the size of B2C [Hoa12], mainly because a typical supply chain has multiple B2B transactions involving suppliers, manufacturers anddistributors; while there is only one B2C transaction with the end customer at the very end of the chain. Communication and collaboration interactions between businesses and within companies are also included as part of B2B, in the form of email or a more specialized system to exchange business data, like Electronic Data Interchange (EDI). Business-to-consumer describes all activities involving businesses providing products or services to end consumers. B2C is the type of e-commerce with higher number of sales behind B2B, but it is by far the most familiar amongst the population. Companies invest a lot of resources in improving the customer experience when interacting with their e-commerce interfaces. These can be in the form of electronic retailing or media to communicate with customers such as email. Electronic retailing, also known as e-tailing, is the largest part of B2C e-commerce, consisting of an online catalog of a retail store or shopping mall, usually called web-shop when it is accessed from the web. In consumer-to-business the B2C process is reversed, thus the end customer is the one that offers goods or services to the company to complete a business process or gain competitive advantage. It is common in specialized blogs and forums, where companies offer money to their owners in exchange of advertisement or review of their products. Consumer-to-consumer is a way of e-commerce where a third party facilitates transactions between consumers electronically. The most popular example of C2C e-commerce is the online auction, in which customers bid to purchase an item that another consumer has posted for sale, while the third party charges a commission for the exchange. Besides these four major forms of e-commerce, there are other interesting concepts that have gained popularity these last years: social and mobile commerce. Social commerce is the adoption of social networking features in the context of e-commerce. When it comes to offline shopping, it is a natural practice to gather information from oneselfs personal social networks before purchasing a product. People usually consult their family and friends for advice, and they often speak to the shopkeeper about suitable products. Joining social networks with online stores allows customers to have the same experience, with the advantage of reaching a largest range of people in a shorter time [GWL11]. On the other hand m-commerce, an abbreviation for mobile commerce, is any kind of ecommerce activity that relies on the usage of wireless devices, such as cell phones, personal digital assistants (PDA) and smartphones. The range of devices enabled for m-commerce also includes general purpose wireless computers, like tablet and laptop computers [TNW01], but are not usually part of research studies. The reason behind that is the existence of hybrid devices between mobile phones and computers, such as smartphones, that are more specifically designed for m-commerce. 